Uh, good morning, Felicity.
Good morning. Tena tatou katoa.
All right. Yes, we can hear you and we can see you.
It's a good start, and I'll hand straight over to you. Cheers.
Wonderful. Well, good morning, everybody.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to, um, talk to you
on behalf of the New Zealand International Business Forum, who some
of you will be, um, familiar with. I'm the new-ish executive
director of the International Business Forum, replacing Steven Jacobi
about 10 months ago. This is my first time talking to the select committee,
um, in this role, so it's wonderful to have this opportunity.
Um,
so, uh, you would've all read our submission.
The International Business Forum is a group of 22, 22
members. We h- are mostly goods exporters, and we
represent, um, a very significant,
um, range of exporters and approximately
$50 billion worth of goods exports in total.
We are supportive of the India FTA,
um, and we have worked, um, including with some members of this
committee along the years to deepen the relationship
with India, um, and you know, sort of bring
this agreement forward to fruition.
I wanted to just say three things about it, and then I'm very happy to
take any questions. So, um, the first thing I wanted
to say is that we do consider the agreement to be commercially
meaningful for our members, um, in particular
for kiwis, apples, pears, forestry,
lamb and sheep meat, those, and seafood.
Those are all, um, members of the New Zealand International Business Forum.
And we think it's commercially meaningful because of the good tariff
reductions on our exports. We were paying very high tariffs into
the Indian market,
um, and also just because of the growth opportunity with India.
So as we put in the submission,
India, um, you know, is on a huge growth trajectory,
and that we sort of need to be part of that growth story if we're going
to, um, take advantage of, um, you know,
the opportunities there. W- our growth to our trade to India
was quite modest, has been quite modest, and in fact, um,
reducing in recent years. So, um, in
t- in 2024, only 718 million,
um, in trade and exports. So when you think of the size of the
opportunity, the, um, consumers, um,
and, um, you know, our high quality premium products, it's
really quite modest.
So, uh, l- many of our members will be making
submissions, so I won't talk to the sort of specific areas, but I wanted to talk a
little bit more to the strategic piece for us.
So in the submission I put that, you know, we're living in a really uncertain
global environment, as you all well know, and that there's huge
disruption out there. Rising protectionism, geopolitical
tension, supply chain disruption.
We're expecting to hear any day on the, you know, American
301 tariffs. Um, we, um,
are dealing with, you know, export controls in some of our key markets
and, um, we've seen, you know, f- trade
being used more as a kind of tool for economic security.
So in that environment, it's really important that our exporters
have, um, options,
and the, that free trade agreements in their way,
you know, they reinforce the rules.
So it's g- um, very heartening to see a large and a small country
committing to a rules-based, um, agreement,
and that for us,
having free trade agreements is one of the few insurance
policies and one of the key insurance policies that we have against that,
um, geopolitical volatility.
So that's, y- you know, I'm happy to talk about that more
if you have questions, but building and diversification, um,
looking at supply chain choke points, um, having more
predictability, that's all really important for New Zealand's business,
um, for our exporters.
The other thing I just wanted to mention is that, you know, for the International
Business Forum, bipartisanship or gro- cross-party support
is really important to us. We've worked, um,
across both neighbor and National, and had really good
engagements in the past with other political parties as well about the importance
of trade. Um, and you know, the,
the, the Labor Party in particular has worked, um, on this over
many years, a- as has National with its, um, you know,
ambitious approach to bring this to fruition.
So that's why we signed the Back the Deal letter that,
you know, for us, one in four jobs in New Zealand depends on trade.
Um, it creates wealth, jobs, puts more money in the pockets of,
um, of everyday New Zealanders. So we, um, yeah, are keen to
see that cross-party support hold.
So perhaps I'll stop there. I'm happy to take questions with my
remaining five minutes.
All right. Very good. Have we got questions for Felicity in the
NZ International Business Forum?
First question, Dr. Lawrence Yun.
Kia ora. Uh, thank you, Chair. Thank you, Felicity, and
congratulations. Um,
just a question on the last thing that you kind of mentioned.
I'm, I'm interested to know, how do you think this
agreement would benefit everyday New Zealanders?
Yeah. Well,
just what I said that, you know, one in four jobs in New Zealand
depends on trade, that our members are really significant,
um, employers. That, um-They employ and
train many New Zealanders, and in order to continue to be
successful overseas, they need those options, that
diversification, that they can go into other markets.
So over time,
we expect trade with India to grow and
that to create more opportunities.
Can I just check with a follow-up question?
I understand one in four jobs in
here are tied into trade, but I guess that's trade in
general.
Mm-hmm.
What is the additional opportunity if you-- It's
fine if
NZIBF hasn't actually done ...
I'll be keen to know exactly with this particular agreement,
not including existing trade relations with India, what are some of the
potential-- Have you done any analysis on what potential jobs could be
created as a result of this?
Particularly when you're looking at urban centers and et cetera, where there seems
to be a higher rate of unemployment.
Mm-hmm. I think it's a good question.
We haven't modeled specific jobs.
The only thing I would say is that we consider the national interest analysis
to be quite conservative, that actually when we look
at the modeling that was done for the China FTA and the EU FTA,
in fact, that modeling was quite conservative compared to the amount of
export earning that came. With the EU agreement, I think
$3 billion, nobody really expected that much
success with the EU.
Mm-hmm. Cool. Thanks.
Next question, Dr., sorry, Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you very much, and apologies for not being on video.
Look, and I missed it, unfortunately, got disconnected.
But Felicity, thank you for your submission.
What level of investment have you had indications from your
members that is likely to go into India,
given the commitment to promote, and I guess,
the honest assessment that the Indians will be watching this very, very closely.
How much do you think will come from your members?
Mm-hmm. Yeah, the first thing I'd say is that we,
having read the text, believe this is a commitment by the government to promote,
not a commitment by our investors necessarily to invest.
That said, there are cooperation activities
already, as you know, in kiwis and apples.
So I guess on the investment, we accept the assurance of the
government that the Indian side understands that
this is a commitment to promote, and that it's not a target
per se. And we sort of accept that they will have
a way to measure that. I think in general terms, as you know, Damien,
investment does flow from trade. The more that we trade, the more
that we invest.
So we would expect our investment to grow, but we haven't modeled
specific investment that we expect from our members.
Tim Costley.
Yeah, just thinking about that, because I'm thinking back
20-odd years to when we first had the China Free Trade
Agreement, and I think there were a number of similar questions, and I think we can
understand why people might have that, because it hasn't taken
effect yet, so we haven't seen that gain.
But we've had some people come on here and say, "Oh, we don't think we should do
it."
But they don't think we're better off without it.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm just wondering, what's your message to people like that?
We heard the question before, how is this going to create a job in
urban centers? Actually, there's massive growth in the regions, and sometimes,
we need to move to where the opportunity is. We need to be a bit agile.
What's your message, though, to people that maybe are thinking
this is,
I don't know, they have questions about the future and if it will really grow.
Mm-hmm. Just that this is a really important strategic
play for New Zealand in the future, that we need to be part of the
Indian growth story. That it provides us options,
but that India is not just any port in a storm,
that we do see this kind of massively burgeoning middle
class, and that we expect that there will be a desire for our high-quality
premium products. What's the counterfactual?
We wait another 20 years for a better deal?
We're already at a competitive disadvantage from some of
our key partners, particularly the Aussies in that market, and we
really have to be in it to win it at this point.
Excellent.
Thank you.
All right. That brings us to an end of this session.
Thank you very much for your time, Ms.
Roxburgh, on behalf of the New Zealand International Business Forum.
Thank you. Thanks for having me.
Cheers. Okay, we move now to Sophie Tamati.
Kia ora.
Good morning, Ms. Tamati.
Sorry, I'm just having difficulty there.
There we go. Yes, we've got you now. Excellent.
All right.
Right, straight over to you.
Tuatahi me mihi atu ki a koe te hemana, ki o
koutou katoa ngā mema o te komiti. I just want to say
thank you for this opportunity to share my thoughts.
It is my first time to write a submission, and indeed, I was
so surprised
really to receive the email to say I could actually talk to you all.
But I'll get to the point. I do want to read a little bit,
and maybe you will have questions if there's time
left over. My submission focus
focuses on my concern with the process used
to negotiate this agreement, and whether that
process was consistent with the Crown's treaty
obligations.In my view-- Sorry,
there's this thing that's popped up.
In my view, this agreement highlights the
ongoing tension between how trade agreements
are negotiated and the Crown's
responsibilities under the Treaty of
Waitangi.
Treaty partnership requires more than just mere
consultation after key
decisions have been shaped. It requires good
faith engagement
that is informed and meaningful to influence
outcomes, certainly for Maori.
Maori must have access to the information needed
to fully engage and make informed decisions that
affect their rights and interests.
The treaty exception clause allows the Crown to act
if necessary once an agreement
is in place. It's not a
substitute for treaty partnership because
it doesn't give Maori the opportunity to shape the
agreement from the outset.
New Zealand has committed to supporting the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, including rights to participate in
decision-making and informed consent.
But it's unclear whether these were fully
met in this agreement.
Precedent is not just set by law.
It's also set by what we do repeatedly.
If Maori participation is repeatedly limited
in negotiating trade agreements, that
sets a precedent, and over time that,
in my opinion, risks marginalizing the
treaty.
The key step now for me
is an independent review to check
if treaty obligations were met
before ratification and identify any
gaps to improve future processes.
All I want is for the process to
respect the treaty,
to be fair, and to lead to strong, lasting
agreements.
Excellent.
Well done, Ms. Tamati. Appreciate your contribution.
Now we've got time for a quick question if there are any from members.
Excellent.
Oh, no, Mr. Chair, but I just wanted to say it was great to-- I didn't agree
with 100% of what you said, but I just thought it was great that you took the time
to submit and came and chatted today. So well done.
Yes.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you for your time.
All right then. Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Steven Franks.
Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Franks.
We can't see you. Yeah, but we can hear you.
I'm hopeful I can change that, but I'll carry on if I can't.
Well, we can see an empty chair now.
Take off your cloak of invisibility and we'll be fine.
I'll move it one way or the other, but I'll be there.
Okay. Ah, yes, there we go.
That's good.
Very good.
Thank you.
Okay. Crack on.
My
concern, I should say,
welcome the
free trade agreement with India. I'm the
chairman of the Forest Owners Levy Trust, and of course, Forestry is delighted
that this achievement has
got as far as it has as quickly as it has.
But I am really concerned that
there are people within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs who have done, again, what has often been done with international
agreements. They have embarked on some sort of frolic
to achieve domestic political aims that have absolutely
nothing to do with free trade
of reaching an agreement with India.
And
the inclusion of UNIDROIT and indeed the
elevation of it
is a disgrace,
and I ask, I really hope that the
ACT Party would see it as a sufficiently important
matter to send a message that officials
or even ministers should not pull this kind of stunt by saying they won't
agree with it until
that damage is nullified. This is why
people mistrust free trade agreements.
They believe, it's just as Jane Kelsey has always said, that
they are exploited for domestic political advantage.
And in this case is a brilliant example where
UNIDROIT has absolutely no relevance.
India, indeed, has reserved its position, no
relevance to the India Free Trade Agreement.
And the inclusion of it is
really
what I discovered when I was an MP and sitting in your shoes over two
terms, that one simply could not trust foreign affairs officials to be
there
without them trying to screw the scrum.
And in this case, UNIDROIT is only in
a declarationNew Zealand is a signed up
covenanted party to the
United Nations Convention for the Elimination of all forms of Racial
Discrimination,
which therefore has a superior legal status to
UNIDROIT.
But there are New Zealand judges and there are
people in the New Zealand Wellington establishment trying
to elevate UNIDROIT above the UNCERD,
above the Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination.
Which is, if you care to read the two, you'll see that they are clearly
inconsistent, and the earlier one has a higher
legal status, which
some of the New Zealand judges are trying to erode.
I'm happy to answer any questions, but it's a plea to
MPs to stand up to make sure that this kind of stunt doesn't just get pulled
on you again in hundreds of pages of documents to have
something like this, using free trade process
to achieve covert domestic political gain.
All right.
We have a question from the Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you, Steven, and thankfully, Parliament has more wisdom than
the ACT Party, so it takes a more collective approach.
Can I just ask of you,
trade agreements are for the purposes of benefit to
the domestic people in the
trading nations, not just for an ideological
signing of an agreement. Do you agree with that purpose?
No. Trade agreements are for
reducing the barriers that countries erect
against other people's products.
They-
Yeah, but what are the purposes of removing those barriers?
Well,
Damien, it's idle to ask me rhetorical questions.
Of course, they're for benefit. But that doesn't mean that you take-
Well-
... a highly contentious
piece of international
legal engineering and stick it into your trade agreement because people want the
trade agreement.
I-
They'll then agree to forgo debate on the domestic
engineering.
I was just challenging your view that trade agreements
are not for domestic purposes, and I would contest that.
Indeed, that's the objective. It is to benefit
the people of a nation involved in the
agreement.
Well, that's never in doubt, but you don't sign it unless it's to benefit the
people of the nation. The question is whether sticking a reference
on a matter that is highly contentious internally where New Zealanders should,
and New Zealand Parliament should get a chance to debate the detail.
Sticking that into treaties has been a time-honored way
to try and evade local
political process,
and it's sneaky, and it means that these things get
discredited.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning, Mr. Franks.
Appreciate it.
Okay. We move now to Dianne Downward.
Good morning, Dianne.
Okay, we can see you, Dianne.
Sorry, we can't hear you very well.
There's sound there, but it's very quiet.
Seems to be a volume issue.
Got IT support there?
I don't know.
Can
you
call me on my phone?
No, we're not able to pick you up, unfortunately.
There is a sound there, so it's not a mute issue, but it's a volume
issue.
Can you hear me at all then if I talk loud?
Perhaps we might look at heading to our next submitter if they're available
and
just get an indication from the clerk if the next submitter is
available. They are. So look, Dianne, perhaps take
a moment while we're hearing from the next submitter to see if you can rectify the
sound issue, and we can try to bring you in after that.
Oh, thank you.
Thank
you.
Okay. Right, now we have Voices for Freedom.
Good morning.
Excellent. We can hear you.
Great. Thank you. Because I have no tech support.
Very good. Okay. Over to you, Katie.
Thank you. Thank you, chair and members.
My name is Katie Ashby-Coppins. I'm here this morning on behalf of
Voices for Freedom as the head of legal.
Voices for Freedom is a grassroots New Zealand organization started by three
moms in 2020.
Today, there are more than 100,000 supporters behind us, with more than
40,000 active across 100 local groups spread throughout the
country.Today I've kept to our code of conduct this morning,
respectful, measured, and grounded in the documents.
I want to start out by saying we are not against trade, and we're not against
India, and we're not suggesting that New Zealand should isolate itself from the
world.
What we are concerned about is something much simpler.
A decision of this magnitude was made before New Zealanders were even
asked whether they agreed with it,
and that really is my first point. Before turning to the detail, I have
one fundamental question for this committee.
What provisions of this agreement, if any, could still be amended,
renegotiated, or declined as a result of concerns raised through this
process?
If the answer is very few, then many New Zealanders will ask the simple question:
If the agreement cannot meaningfully be changed, what exactly are we being
consulted on today?
As once this agreement enters into force, much of it becomes very difficult
to unwind.
If we get it wrong, we simply can't amend a policy or elect a different government
and move in a different direction.
We are left with two choices: live with the consequences or withdraw from the
agreement altogether, which on the international stage is terribly embarrassing.
What is not how many New Zealanders would expect important and far-reaching
national decisions to be made. We are therefore asking this committee
to recommend that New Zealand not ratify this agreement in its current
form. At the very least, we ask that ratification be
delayed until there is proper public consultation on the
long-term immigration, investment, and sovereignty consequences
of the commitments being made.
Our concerns can be summarized now under three headings.
So that's me turning to the documents.
First, there was no meaningful
public consultation before signing.
Second, the agreement contains immigration and investment commitments that future
governments may find difficult or impossible to reverse.
And third, the economic benefits appear most
modest compared with the concessions being given away.
Turning to the economics, the government's own modeling projects gains of
approximately $400 million per year on average
through to 2037. That number does sound like a large
number, but in the context of New Zealand's economy, it's actually
quite modest. It's equivalent to a fortnight of government borrowing.
Even more importantly, much of the projected export growth is not new
trade at all.
According again to the modeling, around three-quarters of the increase in
exports to India comes from trade being redirected away from markets we
already supply.
So while the headline numbers sound impressive, the practical gains appear
considerably smaller than New Zealanders might assume.
Again, those gains we must consider what is being given
away.
One of the greatest concerns raised by our supporters is immigration.
The student annex provides a clear example.
New Zealand has agreed not to impose numerical caps on Indian students,
but we do not currently have such caps now, so the issue
is what changes tomorrow?
The issue is what options are surrendered for the future by the signing of this
agreement in its current form.
Around the world, countries such as Australia, Canada, and United Kingdom are
currently reviewing and restricting international student numbers because of
concerns around housing, infrastructure, migration pressures,
and economic influences.
The practical effect of this provision removes a policy option for future
governments, whether that's intended or not.
And this is not merely an educational issue.
It's also an immigration issue.
Government figures show that Indian students transition to permanent residence
at a higher rate than any other nationality, just shy of
50%.
The work provisions raise similar concerns.
The specialist category within the intra-corporate transferee framework
contains no numerical cap, no New Zealand wage floor,
and no requirement to test to see whether a New Zealander is available to do the
job first.
There are, of course, qualification requirements, but they are largely
administrative in nature.
Taken together, the student and worker pathways point to one direction,
ongoing permanent settlement from a single source country.
Whether people support that outcome or oppose it is not really the point.
The point is that New Zealanders were never asked.
No election was fought on it, no public consultation was conducted on it,
yet these commitments would become harder to change than ordinary immigration
policy because they would sit inside an international treaty.
That leads directly to our second concern.
Many of the most significant commitments in this agreement are difficult to
reverse. A future government that wished to cap student numbers or
require employers to look for New Zealand workers first would not
necessarily be free to do so. Those policy tools are
effectively surrendered once the agreement takes effect.
That matters because governments change, public priorities change,
economic conditions change, and we do not have a crystal ball for the
future.
Yet this agreement locks future governments into this decision made today.
The investment chapter raises similar concerns.
New Zealand has committed to seek approximately $20 billion of
additional investment into India over 15
years. That's around $33 billion New Zealand
dollars.
India has undertaken no equivalent commitment in return.
If New Zealand fails to meet that target, India may suspend tariff
concessions obtained by New Zealand exporters.
There is no independent arbitrator determining whether that response is
justified. There are simply further
consultations.The concern is that the agreement
reaches beyond tariffs and trade.
It also includes cooperation on payment systems and
centralized bank digital currencies.
Whether those ideas are good or bad is not my point.
My point is that decisions about the future of our money should be debated in
public and not discovered in the annexures of a trade agreement.
Many New Zealanders will reasonably ask why New Zealand should be committing itself
to such a large one-way objective when we face pressing
infrastructure, housing, and investment needs at home.
The final concern is whether the agreement represents a balance exchange.
At the border, New Zealand removes tariffs on all Indian goods
immediately. India doesn't do the same.
Approximately 30% of Indian tariff lines remain protected,
including sectors of greatest interest to New Zealand, such as dairy and meat.
At the same time, government's own modeling projects significant increases in
imports of clothing, textiles, and other manufactured goods from
India.
These are precisely the industries weak that remain vulnerable in New Zealand.
In other words, the gains appear relatively modest, while many of the
concessions are permanent. That is why this agreement deserves more
scrutiny than it has received. It's not simply about trade, it
is about choices, choices that future governments may wish to make,
choices that future voters may wish to make, choices that become
significantly harder once they're embedded in this international treaty.
So that's where the government's own documents leave us.
New Zealand was not consulted before these commitments were weighed.
Future governments may find
many of the commitments difficult to reverse, and the
projected economic gains appear modest relative to concessions
being offered.
I think a good example is a child born in New Zealand this
morning will not be able to cast their first vote until
2044,
yet they'll inherit the consequences of the decisions made today.
We therefore ask the committee to recommend that New Zealand not ratify this
agreement in its current form, and at the very least, we ask that
ratification be delayed until New Zealanders have been given the opportunity to
fully understand and debate what is being agreed in their
name. Thank you very much.
Right. Thank you very much. Really appreciate that detailed assessment
of the FTA.
Time for a quick question if members have one.
Dr Lawrence, you may.
Cool. Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for your submission, Katie.
I just have a quick question on,
just so you're aware as well, in terms of the international treaty
examination process, the process itself rather than the content, which is
part of your submission, is something that the Standing Orders Committee is
currently looking at, so standing orders 405 to 408.
And just so you are aware, that might be something for you to keep an eye on.
Oh, good. Thank you so much. I appreciate that, Dr Lawrence.
Cool. Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning, Ms Ashley-Coppins.
Appreciate your-
Oh.
Yes.
Wonderful. I think you've got Diane back, so I will look forward to watching her.
Good on you, Diane.
Hi.
Okay. We can hear you this time, Diane. We'll crack straight into it.
Oh, yeah, sorry about that.
Good.
Yeah. So I'm not against free trade with India, but this
agreement comes at a cost in more than just dollars,
as many people have already outlined.
Much has already been said about the problems of immigration in relation to
jobs, in particular tech jobs, although we may need a few
more apple pickers.
I will not repeat all the problems that have been mentioned here, but only
state that this seems to be robbing our young people of their future
here in New Zealand.
So something that hasn't been talked about a lot is the
Paris Article six of the Paris Agreement being introduced to this trade
agreement. As the IPCC has now stated that their
SSP5 8.5 is implausible, which
according to the dictionary means causing disbelief or it
refers to something that is difficult to believe or accept as true.
So the actual standard that has been used to calculate all our
climate models is now considered difficult to
believe or accept as true.
I feel a recalculation is in order, especially since Article
128 of this agreement states it's to be based
on the best available science. So data causing
disbelief is not the best science available.
Also, considering 50% of our greenhouse gas is from farming,
and the Paris Agreement has always stated in Article 2B, that
food production shouldn't be threatened, i.e., should not be included in greenhouse
gas emissions. But for some reason, successive governments have made
farming a focus of our emission reductions.
I think it is prudical that Article 6 of the Paris Agreement is
not included in this trade agreement and could be discussed at a future date
when everything has been recalculated using the best
science available.
I want to mention Howie Smith, sorry,
the Albana Gowie Smith submission about
digital IDs and CBDCs and all the associated
implications, and state that I support his
submission.
Another highly objectionable element is Article 92,
investment promotion, where New Zealand will aim to
invest $20 billion US in India, as already been
mentioned by many people. And it's also been
highlighted, oh, this is just an aim.
But because there is also a
whole procedure to reach a mutually agreed solution if
this is not fulfilled, this is far more than just an
aim.So
we're investing billions in India, all the while we cannot afford to keep our
health professionals, keep police we've trained, build
badly needed infrastructure, and all the other issues people
have mentioned.
So this also needs to be dropped.
Another issue many have mentioned is UNDRIP, which has no place in
a trade agreement.
India has not asked for this to be included, and indeed, it considers all its
citizens indigenous, not favoring one
ethnic group over another, and they have many ethnic groups there.
We have the Treaty of Waitangi addressing all the same concerns that are within
UNDRIP. So what is the benefit of adding yet another document to be
discussed, defined, and interpreted?
Adding UNDRIP could have unintended consequences.
Maori themselves are not a united people, as some fly the sovereignty
flag and others Hei Waka Putanga, and many, many Maori just want to get on
with their life, put food on the table, have a roof over their head, and are not
concerned with the politics of advancing Maori culture and language.
Therefore, I ask that Article 13.2 be removed completely.
It is not needed and could only complicate discussions and processes
already taking place under the treaty.
I see a larger issue with social cohesion at this time, especially when large
numbers of people have come, and will still come from countries
culturally different to our own, and will enlarge the growing number of
cultural enclaves in our major cities.
Having different cultural norms existing in the same country only causes
clashes when the two come into conflict.
Uniting around Kiwi values, cultures, laws,
and traditions is the glue of a socially cohesive
society where everyone understands the same norms.
Without the social norms, it would be like driving on the road without a road
code.
So thank you. Any questions?
All right. Thank you very much for that, Diane.
We are at the end of our time, so we will keep going, but appreciate your
submission, and thank you for being able to work through those technical issues.
Okay. Sorry. Yeah. Thank you.
No problem. Thanks. Okay, we come next to Sam
Brosnan.
I'm not sure that he's here. So we will
move instead to
Te Taumata Trust Maori Advisory Committee and Hone
McGregor.
Right.
Hello.
Thank you. Yes. Hone McGregor. Kia ora.
Right. Okay. I'll bring straight to you, Hone.
Kia ora. Thanks. Yes, we're Te Taumata Maori Trade Advisory Trust.
So thanks for the opportunity to appear before the committee today.
I've only got a few minutes, so I'd probably like to focus on just four things.
Firstly, why Te Taumata supports this agreement,
why it matters for Maori exporters in the Maori economy,
why we also support the cultural chapter in the agreement, and then lastly about
implementation. So, I do just want to start off by just acknowledging all the
work of everybody because we
don't do that enough for the ministers, the negotiators, the officials both in New
Zealand and over in India to bring this agreement to
completion. We understand that trade agreements are never perfect.
Every agreement involves a give and take.
Every agreement leaves some issues that are unresolved, and the question isn't
whether the agreement's perfect actually.
The question is whether it leaves New Zealand, and in our case,
Maori exporters and Maori businesses better positioned for the
future than we otherwise would be.
And of course, our view is that this agreement does do that.
Maori, we take a different view on trade.
We've been traders for a long time.
Before Aotearoa actually developed this modern New Zealand
economy, the Maori
were providors of food and timber, produce, and those sorts of
things across the Tasman. We had Maori-owned and flagged ships
moving to Australia doing trade as early as the 19th century.
So that's really part of this kaupapa of trade and enterprise and
relationship building that's been part of our story for the last over 200
years. And just in terms of why
Maori
should be involved in this.
Maori actually aren't niche participants in New Zealand's international trade
because today, Maori own or control approximately half
of all New Zealand's fishing quota, 40% of the forestry assets, about
a third of sheep, beef, and lamb production, 10% of the
dairy, and then 10% of kiwifruit production.
And so collectively, these sectors contribute a billion dollars annually
to export earnings that is directly connected to these Maori
interests, which are then deeply connected to the international market.
So when these export markets perform well,
Maori communities actually benefit.
When international markets are disrupted, as Maori communities, we actually
feel those impacts really directly.
And so Maori are actually more exposed to the international
trading system than many New Zealanders
actually realize. But the long-term view for us,
in 2018 to 2023, the Maori
economy,
that growth really happened because Maori increasingly invested along
the value chains to capture more value.
We built brands, and we
participated in more export markets.
Services, technology, and innovation sectors were part of that
investment, and many of Maori entities, the ones
that will be participating in export, really consider this as an
intergenerational strategy. Wakatu Incorporation, who I'm a chairman of,
we actually have a 500-year intergenerational plan called Te Pae Tawhiti.
When you start looking at those kind of horizons, your perspectives
actually change. You stop asking about whether it's
perfectIn today's context, and we actually start looking at it
from, is it based on the right values?
Does it create these greater opportunities, this resilience,
this prosperity for those future generations and for us?
Te Taumata, this agreement contemplates a mutually
prosperous intergenerational relationship.
And we heard from Felicity, she did a good summary of these things, why India's
important to us. It is a really important long-term
geopolitical strategic partner for Aotearoa, but particularly for this
Indo-Pacific trading bloc. Yes, it's going to have a really significant
growing middle class. It will be the third largest economy.
They will exceed the EU population around things.
So the question for us isn't whether India and this FTA matters, the
question really is
whether New Zealand is positioned inside that growth story or outside of it,
and in Te Taumata, we believe that we should be inside it.
For those reasons that we already heard about the world becoming more
unpredictable, more protectionism, our supply chains are
under real pressure. So diversification isn't really just about a growth
strategy for
all the members of the Māori economy, it's actually a risk management strategy,
it's a resilience strategy, and it gives us that thing that
Vangais talked about in his presentation around optionality.
So we believe that this FTA provides that optionality.
There's some really specific stuff that Māori-owned exporters across the seafood,
forestry, and farming, and horticulture systems get, and you've already heard about
that stuff. But immediate tariff elimination on sheep meat,
significant gains in forestry, seafood exporters tariff reductions.
Wine, so we're the
house of Tohu wines at Wakatu Incorporation, the
first Māori wine brand in the world, I have to say.
150% tariffs were in India, dropping down to
75%, and then over 10 years down to 25%.
That's not fantastic in the beginning, but actually it's really important because
it actually creates that level playing field that we heard them talk about between
us and Aussie, and the UK, and also the EU.
So that along with kiwifruit, we're the only
Māori kiwifruit grower of the South Island.
Those are real opportunities. They are practical commercial outcomes
for Māori businesses and those communities that own them.
The last thing I really wanted to talk about was, which I haven't really heard a
lot about, is this cultural chapter.
The cultural trade, traditional knowledge, and economic cooperation chapter in
13.
And I think from a Māori perspective, this might be one of the most
strategically important parts of the FTA.
That chapter explicitly recognizes Māori.
It recognizes traditional knowledge as an economic and a cultural
asset. It recognizes the importance of protecting traditional
knowledge from any misappropriation, and it also recognizes
that the implementation should be consistent with Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Very specifically in that, it actually creates opportunities, and we heard
a question from one of the committee members before about what does it give?
Well, it actually provides specific opportunities for Rongomai Māori collaboration
and research. That traditional medicines partnership with the AYUSH
system in India.
Indigenous innovation and research partnerships and exchanges, which we have
already currently. And then Māori SME development and
capability development, and then Māori business missions and commercial
partnerships. I was in India just recently, and we met with one of the chambers
of commerce and industry. They had 1.5 million
members. This chapter provides
SME capability building and partnerships.
So that's really important. So if Māori choose to use it well, this
chapter will be strategically important for the agreement.
The last thing for me was really just talk about implementation, because I think
obviously implementation matters.
Trade agreements don't create exports. People create exports.
Relationships create exports. Obviously, trust creates exports.
So trade agreements just remove barriers, and the real work starts at that
ratification. So just, I guess, to leave a message
with the government, to get the real value from this
FTA, we really think that Māori exporters have to be connected
into these trade missions and market development programs, those
investment pathways, this business matching
opportunities, and then any future review mechanisms.
So traditionally for Māori,
our challenge has really been about gaining access, and that's the access to
markets, the capital networks, and value chains.
This agreement actually doesn't solve all of those challenges, but it does
fundamentally improve access, and from a Māori exporter perspective,
access matters because every generation that follows should inherit
more opportunities than the generation before it.
So for those reason, this gives us more confidence in trade and more
certainty, and Te Taumata supports the ratification of the New
Zealand India Free Trade Agreement. So kia ora koutou.
Happy to answer any questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much. There was a question from Vanushi Walters,
or?
There was. I suspect that the submitters semi answered it, but
I might ask it anyway.
There are other submitters who've argued that those
sections on traditional knowledge and genetic resources, Māori
medicine, aren't sufficient or don't offer sufficient
protections. Did you want to respond to that?
Yeah, I mean, I don't think those concerns should be dismissed.
There are legitimate conversations to be had about that, particularly
around implementation and
protection of Māori interests. The difference that Te Taumata is we've been
looking at this through the lens of Māori exporters and Māori economic development.
And from that perspective, the agreement creates meaningful new access and
opportunities while actually preserving the treaty exception.
So we see support around this,
in terms of the economic opportunityAnd then also
continuing to improve those treaty settings, because we think
they're complementary objectives, not really competing ones in this.
Thank you.
Very good. All right. Thank you very much, Mr.
McGregor, for your submission this morning. Appreciate it.
Kia ora.
Yes.
Okay, we move now to Export New Zealand and Business New Zealand.
Joshua Tan.
Waiting
on him to accept and come
on.
Sorry about that.
All right.
Kia ora, Mr. Chair. You can hear me and you can see me all fine?
Yes, we can. Excellent. Over to you.
Thank you so much. Kia ora koutou katoa. Thank you again, Mr.
Chair, for the opportunity to present our position on the New Zealand India free
trade agreement to this committee.
Great to follow along from Hone McGregor and Te Ohu as well, and I
thank you all for your time. My name is Joshua Tan.
I'm the executive director for Export New Zealand, the peak industry voice for New
Zealand's export sector, and a brand under Business New Zealand.
I have also, to my right, Rachel Simpson, who is the
director for skills, immigration, and education for business as well,
just in case there are technical questions from the committee.
Export New Zealand and Business New Zealand strongly support this free trade
agreement and believe it is in the interests of New Zealand to proceed with its
ratification and entry into force as quickly as possible.
There is strong support for this FTA from the business community and across
industries. Export New Zealand and Business New Zealand led a
campaign in April to call on all parliamentary parties
to back the India deal, with over 100 businesses, exporters,
and organizations signed up to the call on our website.
So there is significant interest in this deal and what the Indian market could hold
for our companies. We urge the New Zealand government to continue seeking
improvements to market access for our dairy exports, and also to continue
monitoring the impact of the agreement in other sectors and to identify other areas
for improvement. Trade with India is relatively low compared
to some of our other trading partners, and this is why this agreement is so
important for our exporters. As the deal comes into force, we believe that
government agencies need to be working closer with industry, and
prioritize practical measures to support
exporters wanting to leverage this agreement.
New Zealand Trade & Enterprise, Ministry for Primary Industries, and Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and Trade, amongst other agencies,
know that they can work with us and the Business New Zealand network to amplify
their efforts. The removal of high tariffs and non-tariff barriers
will be a game changer for opening up the market, and that is critical at a
time when we see other markets choosing to impose tariffs on New Zealand.
Lastly, we would like to acknowledge the hard work of our officials, our
negotiators, who worked on this deal.
We understand that it was a hard-fought negotiation, so they have our thanks
and our congratulations on getting the deal done. Thank you to the committee.
You have our written submission as well, so I will leave it there, and I will open
up for questions.
Excellent. Very good. Thank you for your contribution this morning.
Questions for Export NZ and Business New Zealand.
Dr. Lawrence Yun.
Oh, sorry.
That's all right.
Tim, do you want to go first?
Oh, well, look, I was just wondering if you
had a really tangible example
that you could share with the committee.
We've heard from some big industry associations and with people with sort
of conceptual opposition or support, whatever it might be.
But I wondered if you just had a tangible example for one of your members of what
it might actually mean or what it might actually look like. Thank you.
Thanks. Thanks, Tim. Look, I think we've got a lot
of examples from a whole bunch of different areas.
If you look at the types of exporters and businesses that signed up to the Back the
Deal campaign,
you've also heard from a number of big industry groups, but you had
agriculture technologies and agri-machinery.
You had horticulture products such as avocados, seeds and grains, vegetables,
manuka honey. You've got medical products and devices, health and wellness goods,
bioenergy, clean technology. You've got education providers, manufactured
products. You've got professional services such as designers and architects
also signed up to that
deal. We've had some really good discussions with the creative sector,
in particular film production and post-production, around opportunities for them.
So if you're looking for a clear example of somewhere where we haven't heard from
so far within this committee process, it's probably them.
And they are quite attached to the
American film industry. Actually, we need to broaden out opportunities across Asia,
within their film industry, to offer them opportunities to
diversify their market. We've also had several inquiries from Indian New
Zealanders wanting to get into exporting New Zealand products to India as well.
So hopefully it gives you a broad idea of the types of
sectors that would benefit from this agreement.
Okay, we'll go to Dr. Lawrence Yun.
Thank you. And thank you for your submission.
I just want to focus on, I had it before,
I think between 6.6 to 6.10 of your submission, which is around the
investment commitment, and this is a question we've been asking some of the other
groups as well. I guess the two-part question is,
what sort of investments do you expect Export NZ or Business NZ,
if you are able to quantifyHave you made any initial commitment
towards that $33 billion of promotion?
I see, I think you put it in 6.9. And the second question
is,
in 6.9, you're trying to argue for the nuance between the
promotion and obligation, but our understanding at this
stage is that India can,
within a 15-year review, over a 15-year period and in 5-year chunks,
review and unilaterally decide whether New Zealand has met that
obligation or not.
So I guess with those two questions, if you wouldn't mind just
elaborating on what you had in your submission, if you can quantify an amount
with us.
Sure.
So Export New Zealand, Business New Zealand are membership organizations, so we are
obviously representative of a wide range of businesses
and exporters.
I think in terms of your question, it's important to distinguish between promoting
investment and the mandated outcome.
Like our officials, we interpret the commitment to mean promotion
of India as a destination for private investment.
And for us, that means working with the government on
business delegations, supporting promotional events in New Zealand
around Make in India, ensuring that our businesses utilize the
India Investment Desk when they need to engage.
It means working with the Indian government to also understand what opportunities
there are to invest in India. I think it also,
further to your question, depends on what is defined as investment.
I recall some of the other submitters over the past two committees
have talked about the need to open up offices, employ staff, market
consultants, and also services in order to grow their market share.
For some, it also might mean establishing manufacturing hubs in India when
it's deemed to be necessary. That's jobs for Indian
citizens. That means investment into the market, and hopefully there is a real
craving and an attachment to New Zealand products as well.
Over 15 years of relationship building, I think that can speak for a lot.
There is also the opportunity for investment in areas where New
Zealand has strong capability. So it may not be capital investment, but it might be
knowledge transfers and exchanges around food systems,
agritech, education, clean technology.
These are areas which can lead
to economic growth and better outcomes for the Indian population.
So-
Can I just-
... I guess the question is-
Yeah
Can I just check? Because what you are saying is your interpretation.
You specified New Zealand interpretation.
And from what we've heard, that is not India's interpretation.
And India can unilaterally-
Mm
... decide what their interpretation is, regardless of how we interpret.
How would you get around that?
I can't speak for the Indian side, unfortunately.
I can't
speak to how they interpret
the agreement and the text. I can only speak to what our interpretation
is of the agreement and of the text.
And we would agree with our officials, and then it's up to them,
government to government, around how do they engage with the Indian side to ensure
that
we are doing our bit around promoting trade, sorry, promoting
investment.
That's fair. Thank you so much.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you very much, Joshua.
Appreciate your insights this morning on behalf of Export NZ and Business New
Zealand. Thank you.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay.
We are due to hear next from Tracy Wignell.
I don't believe she's available. Neither is Hayley White
or Wayne Widdowson following on.
I believe, though, we have Susan Dyson
with us,
so we might jump to her, and
hopefully some of these other submitters will arrive
over the course of Susan's submission.
So Susan, you just need to accept the
promotion. There should be a button on your screen
that you can accept to come in and submit.
Excellent.
Okay.
All right, Susan, can you hear me?
Yeah.
Is that better?
Hello.
Excellent. All right. We can hear and see you.
That'd be nice. Thank you.
Now we can start with your submission.
Thank you for joining us earlier than anticipated. I'll hand over to you.
Thank you very much for this opportunity to speak to my concerns about
the free trade agreement with India.
My concerns about the free trade agreement are not because it involves India,
but rather because it effectively functions as an immigration
agreement.
I would raise the same issues if any country were granted
such streamlined access to New Zealand.
A substantial increase in migration to New Zealand over
time will lead to significant enduring
changes to our... I've just got to shut the door. Sorry.
I've got a phone going off.
Sorry about that.
Nice fun little ringtone there.
Okay. So a substantial increase in
migration to New Zealand will, over time, lead to
significant and enduring changes to our
nation's demographic profile and social
cohesion.
I believe that when countries with markedly different cultural
values are involved, it is important to implement stricter
controls rather than relaxing themThe
FTA may limit New Zealand's ability to regulate student
admissions, determine labor market policies, and
influence long-term migration outcomes.
For context, there was nearly
48,000 international tertiary students enrolled in New Zealand in
2025, in addition to the many international
students at the 20 English language schools.
Indian students will be able to also bring their families with them for the
duration of their studies, for as long as they can
finance it.
While most international students leave on completion of their studies,
reports suggest that 47% of Indian students
remain in New Zealand and transition to permanent residents.
Indian students have the opportunity to work while studying.
With unemployment already a concern in New Zealand, this training
will intensify competition for entry-level jobs,
making it even harder for New Zealanders, including those with disabilities,
to find employment as the job market becomes overcrowded.
I mean, more crowded.
An example is Domino Pizzas. They're already an accredited
employer,
and they employ many Indian workers in those entry-level positions.
I strongly oppose affirming the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People, the UNDRIP, in the
India FTA. Some New Zealand legal
experts warn that this could create a
binding international obligation impacting
how domestic laws are interpreted.
Courts may treat UNDRIP as authoritative, effectively making it
binding in New Zealand law. The India FTA
affirms UNDRIP, unlike the UK and EU
arrangements or agreements that only note it.
So perhaps indicating a deeper commitment.
The provision could also act as a constitutional Trojan horse,
potentially justifying political change like co-governance through trade
policy.
Parliament can only accept or reject the agreement as signed.
If approved, UNDRIP's affirmation will be embedded in New Zealand
law to the same extent as this FTA.
The FTA process raises significant concerns about
the New Zealand government's transparency
and upholding of democracy, especially given the lack of public
debate and domestic ratification on UNDRIP,
and could have significant consequences, including the
increasing division along racial lines within New Zealand.
There are no anti-corruption mechanisms within this FTA.
In India, corruption affects many official processes such as
document issuance, university admissions, and academic
grading,
making it difficult for New Zealand institutions to
verify the authenticity of submitted
documents and qualifications with certainty.
Additionally, India's manufacturing sector
faces widespread counterfeiting across industries
including fashion, electronics, pharmaceutical, food, automotive,
and agrochemicals, the very products that will gain free range entry
to New Zealand.
An example of this is from 2025, where
436 Indian nationals used fake
documents and support letters regarding
previous employment as truck drivers to obtain United
Arab Emirates truck driving licenses, and
then they used those UAE documents to gain class
five licenses in New Zealand fraudulently.
And lastly, the financial cost to New Zealand.
New Zealand has agreed to invest $33 billion
of New Zealand money in India over the next 15 years,
averaging at $2.23 billion per year to help
build capacity to compete against New Zealand in global
markets.
Yeah.
There are not enough guarantees that New Zealand exports will significantly
increase profits to New Zealand
with this in mind, and India can re-impose tariffs if we do
not make these payments.
All right.
Finally, hang on. Finally, one last thing.
I suggest a significant rise in migration from a country with
very different cultural and
religious values
may cause lasting changes to New Zealand's population makeup
and social unity.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks for my submission.
No problem. Thank you very much for your time today.
We will let you go and answer that phone call.
It wasn't a phone call, it was the
thing to say to come onto here.
Oh, an alarm. A reminder. Good. Okay.
No, it's just-
Thank you very much, Ms. Dyson. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Cheers. Okay, so we
seem to...
Nah, we still don't have Tracy Wignall, Haley White,
Wayne Widdowson, Miriana Rifa.
Doesn't look like we have any of those. We do have Jane McKenzie.
Thank you very much, Jane, for joining us ahead of schedule.
We will hand straight over to you. Thank you.
Oh, sorry, we can't hear you actually, Jane.
Why not?
Oh, yes, it's very quiet. Perhaps try volume there.
Am I pushing the right thing?
Yes. Yes.
Is it working?
I think we can hear you now.
Is that working?
Yes, that's working now.
Fine. Righty-oh. Sorry, I'll just start again. Right.
So my time starts now?
Yes.
Thank you. There is a real risk of the inclusion of UNDRIP in
this binding international treaty will be used to argue for its
increased influence over New Zealand without any clear democratic
mandate from the public. This inclusion could be
totally detrimental to the safety and protection of the people of our
nation. So is this about trade or something else? Is this working?
Can you hear me all right?
Yes.
Within the terms of the agreement was the clause that permitted up to 5,000
temporary skilled workers, plus their families over a three-year period.
On top of that, 1,000 working holiday visas for 12
months.
And I missed something. Oh,
. Seriously, well, they leave after that time anyway, and apart from that, the
doors are open to roughly 20,000 who migrate annually.
India's middle-class population is projected to swell to
715 million by
2031, an increase from today of a
massive 300 million. Our population, on the other hand, is projected to
increase to almost 300,000 by 2031.
What are the chances our government has agreed for New Zealand to receive some of
these 300 million in the future? Could this be part of the deal?
Is it really about trade, or is it about sweetening the deal by amalgamating
our two nations by devious means?
There's somewhere for the 300 million to go.
England, Ireland, Europe are on a downward spiral due to mass
migration and incompetent governments.
Is this where we're headed, where governments and business sectors
lose all authority through being manipulated by the migrants taking
over? Is this our future? Are we to lose our identity?
New Zealand was once safely hidden away, but
now it has the potential to be destroyed.
My original submission was about the massive migration invasion
overseas and my
concern,
oh, catastrophic invasion will occur here,
specifically by a religious group who have no regard for anyone,
except to implement their own agenda.
While we have some wonderful Muslims here, it's the radical ones I'm
concerned about, and because there are others who have no
intention of integrating or assimilating into our culture.
They have set up their own communities and their own charter schools
for Muslims only, where Sharia law is taught, and that should not be acceptable
here. Due to the overwhelming influx of migrants, vetoing has
even been difficult. Consequently, there are 40 known suspected
terrorists now living in our country, and I'd like to know where the other ones
are. The safety of our country is now questionable, but more
so for the future of our younger generation, our beautiful, naive girls
and boys. In England, there are rape gangs
predominantly run by young Muslim men who prey on innocent young girls,
resulting in their lives being completely destroyed.
Our girls have never had to deal with anything like this, and they will be
captivated by the attention, but soon broken.
They must be protected and taught wisdom and self-preservation now.
If this invasion actually happens, it could be the demise of our culture and
our heritage and our way of life, and definitely our younger generation, because
it's not only girls that they rape.
The two top religions in Pakistan are Muslims and
Sikhs. Of these religions, one carries a
21-inch ceremonial sword and the other one wants to impose Sharia
law without exception. Neither of these customs align with the New Zealand way of
life. Our national anthem states we are a free people, a free
nation. It's imperative a
law is passed to prevent swords, intimidation, and coercion occurring
within our borders. Patriotism is not racism.
It's standing up and voicing one's love and protection for their nation,
for their own country. Deals made treacherously by
politicians show contempt for the general New
Zealand populace, and this sleight of hand is no way to run a country.
Any changes of these magnitudes should be transparent before the nation and
with an open debate. We must look after our country and stand
firm, unite, and set boundaries in place now.
I ask for the removal of Article 13.2
and 26 and all the other articles I mentioned on my submit,
or I recommend the removal of UNDRIP.
I agree with Clyde Sors and Leonie McLean and
BFF, and I'd like to bring to attention the increase of
mosques going up on our land, and I ask for the preventative
measure to be put forward to stop the worldwide
praying on the streets, because I find that's pretty bad.
Thank you to the Select Committee, and I hope I got in time. I did.
Excellent.
Wonderful. Well done, Ms. McKenzie. Appreciate your contribution this morning.
Thank you. Yeah. Any questions?
You've come in right on time. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you.
All right. Appreciate it. Cheers.
Okay, we are running a bit ahead of schedule.
We have Professor Kelsey with us now, though.
Thank you very much for coming on a bit early. I'll hand straight over to you.
Okay.
Thank you.
I suspect, especially having heard some recent submissions, that I'm one of
very few people outside the MFAT legal team who
has read the entire India FTA and understood its
implications.
I had planned to be in Wellington to present the
submission and discuss this with the Select
Committee.
Once again, we've got this five-minute nonsense,
which
presents, sadly,
the agreement
as a fait accompli and the hearings as a bit of a sham, and
I'm really sorry that labor seems to be
complicit
in that.Let me
explain. I have worked for a number of years quite
closely with Indian trade officials,
and I understand very well where they're coming from.
The agreement is exactly what I would have expected from
them.
It is asymmetrical.
There are minuscule gains in there for New Zealand.
There is a focus on what India hopes to achieve from it,
but it is also quite possible for India to effectively
cancel whatever concessions they have made
if
either they claim that it has not been
delivered
or circumstances have changed.
I am aware of and was monitoring the previous
negotiations between New Zealand and India,
and indeed suggested ways
that the problems might have been
dealt with,
which previous government chose not to do.
It would've been possible to have some of those conversations this
time. However, the Prime Minister's
precipitous statement about when he intended to have this
concluded
disarmed our negotiators even further
than previously. I note, for example, the negotiation
between India and the EU took four years.
The one with the UK
was over two years to reach an agreement in principle.
So there was no surprise, as I said, when finally
after the fact and after the signing, I was able to give a
close reading to the agreement.
Let me just give two examples in the short time I have
of major difficulties that emerged in
the text that weren't part of the spin that we heard from the government.
The first relates to the tariff rate quotas
for apples, kiwifruit, and honey, which are all captive of
action plans, which we have not seen because I understand that they've not yet
been concluded, or if they have, they've not been released.
The action plans are decided in accordance with India's
understandable preference to assist India's
producers to be able to produce of a quality
and in a competitive manner with what New Zealand is planning to
export into India under this FTA. It rather
reminds me of a previous occasion when there was a New Zealand
export award to exporters of the
kiwifruit stock to Chile, which then
meant that Chile ended up being a major competitor, not only in Chile,
but internationally.
That is the intention,
as I say, understandably of India.
But
it's an own goal from New Zealand's side, and it can be
after five years with a review and a bit of to and
fro,
canceled effectively
by India deciding that New Zealand has not met its part of the bargain.
There is no dispute mechanism that would apply to this.
And indeed, it was done so quickly that there was a
major drafting error that I had to point out to the New Zealand MFAT
officials to fix in relation to the
tariff rate quotas
in Article 14.11.
The second example is this bizarre commitment
to promote $20 billion US of
much needed New Zealand investment into India.
For all the language about promote, it is a positive obligation which New
Zealand has to show that it has made best endeavors as an
international obligation to meet.
India inserted in the previous
agreement where it had such a provision with EFTA,
a footnote
that referred or effectively tied the
obligation to the continuation of
a GDP growth rate in India of around
9.7% per annum. That footnote and
that exit point is not in the New Zealand
FTA. What we have instead is
an ability on the part of India through a whole
series of reviews, five, 10, and 15 years, and then
to and fro after that
for India to conclude that New Zealand has not
promoted 20 US billion dollars of investment
and can effectively unilaterally decide
to negate
some or a large part of the concessions it's made on
tariffs to New Zealand. In addition to that, we have,
of course, New Zealand's need for domestic investment
which will be obvious to all of the members of the committee.
Sorry, I just had a quick question on that if I could just before we finish
up.
The
Article 9.10, Subclause 3 says that those remedial
measures you've just mentioned can stay in place until the
investment objective has been achieved.
Yes.
Is your read of that, that the investment objective is the $20 billion
US?
Yes. It is that New Zealand has
taken steps actively to promote that
quantum of investment into
India, yes.
Yes, and if India feels that hasn't been done, they can
reimpose tariffs, and those tariffs stay in place until the $20 billion is
met.
Until New Zealand can convince
India thatIt has met its
international obligations. And because India will be the
one that decides this,
and there is no appeal in this chapter, there is no dispute mechanism in
this chapter, it is effectively India's unilateral decision
how it interprets that.
Okay.
So I just have a couple of concluding comments.
There are many other flaws in the agreement and in the NIA.
There has been a great deal of mischief on immigration.
I was appalled to hear the previous
witness's evidence. There have been backward steps in
relation to the Crown's obligations onto Tiriti o Waitangi.
Ngā Toki Whakarururanga, who you will hear from shortly, had
in fact
negotiated with MFAT an improved version of the
2001 Treaty of Waitangi exception that was tabled with India.
It's not in the final text. That's a really
unfortunate development because the 2001 exception
still therefore has the many flaws that
MFAT has now basically acknowledged by adjusting the new
one.
The nonsense about the UN declaration,
which actually has
if you look at the UAE agreement, which also
affirms the UN declaration,
this agreement refers to
the existing reservations that both
countries adopted. That was not even in the UAE one.
Clearly, India's pressure around this, and this will have
been from India,
is designed to minimize any
potential action in relation to the UN declaration.
That provision also refers to not duplicating anything in
the FTA that is in other fora, such
as the United Nations. It makes it very clear that this is an
unenforceable chapter,
and it's just total mischief-making nonsense.
All right. I'm going to wrap-
Finally, the racism directed towards Indians here
is appalling. So in a final sentence-
Right. Thank you
... no democratic legitimacy. It's not been through a proper process, and the
fact that I am an absolute expert in this, and get this-
All right. We will need to wrap it up there.
Thank you. We appreciate your time-
And it therefore has no social license and no treaty compliance
... this morning. And that will bring your submission today to an end. Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Ngā Toki Whakarururanga,
who I believe are online with us as well, Donna
Kerige.
Can you hear us, Donna?
Sorry. Kia ora.
Tēnā koutou katoa.
Right. We have 10 minutes set down for your hearing today.
We'll hand straight over to you.
Okay. Kia ora. Tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you for
the opportunity to present Ngā Toki Whakarururanga's feedback today to the
hearing.
My name is Donna Kerige, and I'm a Kaihautū member of the leadership team for
Ngā Toki Whakarururanga.
Ngā Toki Whakarururanga was created under a mediation agreement signed with
the Crown in 2020,
to work with the Crown and its responsibilities under Te
Tiriti and He Wakaputanga in the arena of trade policy,
relations, and agreements.
The mediation and agreements objective was to ensure that Ngā Toki
Whakarururanga has a genuine and meaningful influence on
negotiations, such as those in the India and New
Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
Despite this, the negotiating text, as
Jane just said, was not shared with Ngā Toki
Whakarururanga on a confidential basis prior to its signing.
Ngā Toki Whakarururanga's treaty assessment of the agreement
concludes that in addition to the flawed process, the
final agreement is not treaty compliant.
It has also failed to include a new best practice protection
for the Treaty of Waitangi as co-designed between MFAT
and Ngā Toki Whakarururanga.
In addition, this agreement, I believe, exposes the government and the business
community to greater risks, and more importantly,
it is a lost opportunity for the New Zealand Government to develop a trade
template that reflects true partnership with both our trading
partners and its own Treaty of Waitangi partner.
Ngā Toki Whakarururanga is not anti-trade.
It is pro astute trading partnerships based on
ethical,
culturally grounded, commercially viable, and internationally
credible trade agreements.
Māori have a long history as successful traders and
entrepreneurs. Historically, we have proven ourselves
to be some of the best strategists the world has seen, not only in
warfare but in trade. We have actively
resisted control by others over our trade enterprises across
generations, whether in agriculture,
rongoā Māori, kai sovereignty, the care and protection of taonga
species, or international commerce.
We have consistently affirmed that rangatiratanga includes
economic sovereignty.
Māori expect to work with and alongside others as an
equal partner, be that with the New Zealand Government or global trading
partners, advancing commercial opportunities for Aotearoa,
including the strengthening and protecting of Māori intergenerational knowledge
rights and responsibilities within economic spaces and in
accordance with the Treaty.In 2025,
Dr Jessica Hutchins and myself, both Kaihautū
for Ngā Tūki Whakaruruhanga, traveled to India to talk to farmers
about seed and traditional knowledge sharing.
We learned that we had a lot in common when it came to our respect for food
sovereignty, environmental sustainability, and economic
priorities.
Matua Pita Tipene, co-convenor of Ngā Tūki Whakaruruhanga at the
time, and I also met in Queenstown with the New
Zealand and Indian trade officials, and we were really impressed
by how much we had in common in terms of our views and our perspectives.
So it was a complete surprise to us when the text of the trade agreement and its
failure to protect New Zealanders' rights under Te Tiriti o Waitangi and
the unbalanced nature of the agreement was eventually shared a few
months ago.
To be absolutely honest, this agreement feels like a pre-election
political stunt rather than a partnership between trade allies.
It is heavily weighted in the interests of India at New Zealanders'
expense.
It trades aspirational tariff reductions for significantly increased,
virtually impossible, New Zealand investment in India
with no reciprocal investment in New Zealand, and
very specific access to New Zealand's knowledge economy,
strengthening India's ability to compete with us in a global
marketplace. It feels more like a take it or
leave it deal from India than an astute business agreement
between allies. New Zealand is at very real
risk of selling the crown jewels for unachievable targets and
unaffordable weak protections, including protections
associated with the government's prior commitment to Te
Tiriti.
To be blunt, the treaty is
the only tool New Zealand has available to it to protect
itself against economic cannibalism by predatory
oligopolies in larger trading nations.
Aotearoa must protect itself, our natural resources, and the knowledge
economy, including Mātauranga Māori, by strengthening
treaty compliant frameworks in this and other global trade
agreements. Enduring and mutually rewarding international
trade agreements rely on transparency, mutual trust,
reciprocity, and an equitable distribution of risks and
rewards across parties.
When you read the fine print, this agreement appears to lack both transparency
and a balanced distribution of risk and reward between the people of
India and New Zealand. Not to mention an unacceptable
risk through the failure to adequately protect and
strengthen to the highest level possible Māori
intergenerational knowledge and our rights and responsibilities
agreed to by our ancestors, our mutual ancestors
in Te Tiriti. This agreement undermines the
agreement entered into by our ancestors to determine
our own path. There is no effective recognition of the
constitutional status of Te Tiriti of Waitangi or the Crown's
obligations in the agreement's text, or protection for
measures that comply with Tiriti of Waitangi.
The key for Māori to exercise rangatiratanga under this
agreement will depend on various committees established under the
agreement. It is imperative that Māori have the right representation
at every level to protect our mutual
long-term interest and aligned cultural values, but there is no
provision for Māori involvement in those committees or
their decisions.
It's not clear who the New Zealand government expects will invest the
34 billion in India over the next 15 years.
Is there a commitment from the current or new exporters to meet this investment
promise in return for tariff reductions on their products?
How much do the companies benefit from these proposed reductions?
How much do they currently invest in offshore companies, and would it be feasible
to expect them to shift a substantial portion of that offshore investment
to India to meet this target? It is near
impossible for New Zealand to deliver on this investment promise.
New Zealand's investment abroad to all countries in
2025 was $1.5 billion. The math
just doesn't stack up.
There does not appear to be a plan on how the government intend to address its
current account deficit, giving this aspirational promise of
$34 billion direct investment into India,
especially when New Zealand citizens are repeatedly told that we
must tighten our belts and that there are no lolly scrambles to be had.
Well, at least here in New Zealand.
While India is a trading partner, nothing in this agreement prevents India
from being a New Zealand competitor in global markets once we
have shared the knowledge that makes us world leaders in
certain agriculture, forestry, fisheries, film, and other
industries we excel at. Armed with our expertise,
India can leverage its economies of scale, wealth,
and market size to effectively compete with New Zealand
capability in the international trade space.
There doesn't appear
to be any conditions in the agreement to encourage India to partner with New
Zealand companies, including Māori enterprises, in the pursuit of
new trading opportunities that leverage our, New Zealand's,
existing knowledge capabilities and their economies of scales in new
markets.
We also shouldn't convince ourselves that the proposed tariff cuts
over the next decade will give us an advantage over others
exporting into India. Our exporters will be competing in that market
with many other countries that India has also negotiated
FTAs with.
They have much
greater negotiating power and populations than New Zealand
does.In conclusion, the
treaty is the only tool New Zealand has available to protect
itself against economic
cannibalization from much larger
trading nations and commercial
enterprises. Aotearoa must protect itself, our
natural resources, and the knowledge economy, including
Mātauranga Māori, by strengthening treaty-compliant
frameworks within all trade agreements.
Te Tiriti is a legitimate opportunity for the New Zealand
Government to protect our knowledge economy, our natural resources,
and our environment, nga taonga Māori, from exploitation.
We have seen what weak indigenous protection clauses
and FDAs result in when we look at the impact on
Mexico when their government's attempt to refuse the
importation of GMO corn and was taken to task by
the USA, who ultimately won their case despite their
indigenous protection clause. This agreement fails to
adequately protect the people of New Zealand as outlined in Te Tiriti
including the traditional rights and responsibilities of Māori.
The agreement has the potential to collapse our economy if we are to
honor our side of the agreement by investing 34
billion we can ill afford. And providing India with
open access to our knowledge economy, enabling trading
partners to compete with us in exchange for
tariff reductions without any commitment to
reciprocal investment in wholly owned New Zealand companies.
Ngā Tūki Whakaruruhanga is committed to shaping a system that is
ethical, culturally grounded, commercially viable, and
internationally credible in the international trade arena.
It expects to help protect New Zealand from highly extractive models of trade
that prioritize intellectual property capture and
exploitation over community and environmental benefits.
New Zealand wants to become globally competitive in our areas of
expertise. It will not come from scale alone.
No.
It will come from a combination
of unique biodiversity, indigenous knowledge systems, ethical
leadership, and trusted resources.
We must protect those strengths while enabling innovation.
I have one more sentence, sorry. Ngā Tūki Whakaruruhanga do
not support this agreement being passed into law without significant
revision to protect the rights and responsibilities of the economic
security and sustainability of New Zealand citizens as
provided for in Te Tiriti o Waitangi and the treaty
exception clause jointly agreed between Ngā Tūki
and MFAT.
Okay.
Kia ora. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much for your time. Cheers.
Okay, we move now to our last submitter, Sam Brosnan.
Sorry.
Are you there, Sam? You can hear us?
Good afternoon. How are you?
Yeah, very well, thank you.
Okay, we've received your submission.
You're our final submitter for today, so we'll hand over to you for your five
minutes to bring this session to an end.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
My concerns today on the free trade agreement is just
the speed it has come with and some effects
that I think have been overlooked
in certain industries where the industry I'm
in, we're looking at
a large influx of workers,
definitely in the part-time sense.
And
roughly it costs around $2,000 to train new staff
across the board
in many industries. So we're looking at
mass training because
the students come in and are going to be
far more appealing to hire for certain
industries.
And so we're going to have a mass IP loss at the end of
it also. So my concerns was,
have we looked into staff training
for these part-time students, and the IP
loss we may incur at the end of
their studies? That was my concerns.
And also the added costs
through health and safety and
ACC, I guess,
that they're all entitled to
through our work
thing, sorry.
A second concern was obviously on
transport,
how we're going to monitor transportation.
We're already having struggles with our roading and public
transport in certain areas of the country are at
max capacity now, and obviously,
whatever government's in is trying to find ways to get around that and
solve those issues. But it all leads into the
industries I'm talking about, into warehousing,
truck driving,
these kind of jobs that will be really
taken up by the students. So just making sure
that all the boxes are being ticked and with how everything's
linked through logistics, warehousing,
transport, and making sure we've all
taken into account the mass
influx that's going to put on those sectors.
That was all from me. Thank you.
Excellent. And thanks for raising those points, Sam.
We have a question from Tim Costley.
Yeah, thanks, Sam. I understand what you're saying.
You're the second person that said something similar today.
I'm just wondering, this is thinking about the students that come in from overseas.
So,
I'm interested to hear a bit more about how you think it's going to play out.
At the moment, there's no limit on how many students can come in.
They can work for 25 hours a week. Under this
agreement, there is-A limit, but it also limits
them to,
under this agreement, only 20 hours of work per week, so it's actually less.
How do you think that's going to
look in the community? Do you think that's going to look like more
people in those warehouse jobs that you talked about in transport, even though they
can work less hours and there's currently no limit?
Yeah. Thanks for the question. I sort of took that on board too with
those hours.
Now, it
might be just the areas I'm in, but weekend work and night work
is
lacking in New Zealand and New Zealand is wanting to take those roles,
unfortunately. So I do believe that there'll be a
lot of those roles taken up by the students.
And fair game if they're available.
It's something New Zealand culture is to obviously jump on board as well and
start looking for if we are saying there's a lack of jobs,
but it may be more of a lack of wanting to do
those shifts or roles. But
just from my experience, the Indian culture, they jump on board on
those roles, and obviously that means training and
them gaining IP in the industries will go
up.
Yeah. That is a good point you make about them being maybe more willing to take
some of those jobs, but there's no limit on students coming now.
Do you think even though this imposes some limits, do you think this
will suddenly see more students coming in from overseas?
I definitely think we will see more students, mainly from
not so much the work side, but the extended
years after they've finished their degrees or masters.
If they get post-grad qualification?
Yeah, correct.
And that's where I fear a lot of IP. So we might get past
that initial six months, a year, and then you have a sort of a safe zone where you
think, "Oh, okay, we've got a good worker here." And then
three years comes up and they've done their post-grad or masters, and that
IP just gets sucked out of the business.
All right. Hey, thanks for those points, Sam.
Really appreciate your time this afternoon.
Oh, thank you for your guys' time. Thank you.
Cheers. No problem.
All right, members, that draws an end to the public hearings on the India FTA.
We'll now transfer back to private session.
Thanks.